(IC-1243) Install large wasm (#219)
dfinity/interface-spec: spec/index.md

## Canister module format {#canister-module-format}

> A canister module is a [WebAssembly module](https://webassembly.github.io/spec/core/index.html) that is either in binary format (typically `.wasm`), gzip-compressed (typically `.wasm.gz`), or specified through a list of hashes.  If the module starts with byte sequence `[0x1f, 0x8b, 0x08]`, then the system decompresses the contents as a gzip stream according to [RFC-1952](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1952.html) and then parses the output as a WebAssembly binary. If the module starts with `[0xd9, 0xd9, 0xf7]` then the system interprets the content as a list of hashes.  In this case, the actual Wasm module is obtained by concatenating the individual bitstrings that correspond to these hashes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A canister module is a [WebAssembly module](https://webassembly.github.io/spec/core/index.html) that is either in binary format (typically `.wasm`), gzip-compressed (typically `.wasm.gz`), or specified through a list of hashes. If the module starts with byte sequence `[0x1f, 0x8b, 0x08]`, then the system decompresses the contents as a gzip stream according to [RFC-1952](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1952.html) and then parses the output as a WebAssembly binary. If the module starts with the byte sequence `[0xd9, 0xd9, 0xf7]` (self-describe CBOR tag), then the system interprets the content as a CBOR (see [CBOR](#cbor)) value according to the following [CDDL](_attachments/chunked-wasms.cddl) (see [CDDL](#cddl)).  In this case, the actual Wasm module is obtained by concatenating the individual chunks (from the chunk store of the installed canister or from the chunk store of a specified canister on the same subnet and controlled by the caller) that correspond to these hashes. 
```

> A canister module is a [WebAssembly module](https://webassembly.github.io/spec/core/index.html) that is either in binary format (typically `.wasm`), gzip-compressed (typically `.wasm.gz`), or specified through a list of hashes. If the module starts with byte sequence `[0x1f, 0x8b, 0x08]`, then the system decompresses the contents as a gzip stream according to [RFC-1952](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1952.html) and then parses the output as a WebAssembly binary. If the module starts with the byte sequence `[0xd9, 0xd9, 0xf7]` (self-describe CBOR tag), then the system interprets the content as a CBOR (see [CBOR](#cbor)) value according to the following [CDDL](_attachments/chunked-wasms.cddl) (see [CDDL](#cddl)). In this case, the actual Wasm module is obtained by concatenating the individual chunks (from the chunk store of the installed canister or from the chunk store of a specified storage canister) that correspond to these hashes (skipping the first hash which is the hash of the overall concatenated Wasm module). 

Reviewer 2: What is the rationale for using CBOR here?

Reviewer: We could use Candid that should satisfy all the requirements.

Reviewer 3: I think one other consideration is that third-party apps may want to decode the contents to get the hash (e.g. an app that's evaluating SNS proposals to upgrade). Maybe we want to avoid limiting those apps to using languages with Candid support?

Reviewer 3: Are there any definite advantages to using Candid?

Reviewer: We could introduce a new management canister method, e.g., `install_code_chunked`, and specify the chunks in the Candid payload to the management canister.

    ic0.stable64_grow : (new_pages : i64) -> (old_page_count : i64);            // * s
    ic0.stable64_write : (offset : i64, src : i64, size : i64) -> ();           // * s
    ic0.stable64_read : (dst : i64, offset : i64, size : i64) -> ();            // * s
    
    ic0.certified_data_set : (src: i32, size: i32) -> ();                       // I G U Ry Rt T
    ic0.data_certificate_present : () -> i32;                                   // *
    ic0.data_certificate_size : () -> i32;                                      // *
    ic0.data_certificate_copy : (dst: i32, offset: i32, size: i32) -> ();       // *

>     

Reviewer: Could we please get rid of those white spaces throughout this PR?

The optional `sender_canister_version` parameter can contain the caller's canister version. If provided, its value must be equal to `ic0.canister_version`.

> ### IC method `upload_chunk` {#ic-upload_chunk}

Reviewer: We should limit the maximum number of chunks that can be stored (it shouldn't be necessary to have more than 5 chunks stored at any time) as otherwise we could make the management canister API vulnerable from the security perspective.

Reviewer 3: Agree, but I think the limit will be more than 5. We currently allow Wasms to be 30MB uncompressed, so if we want to allow them to installed using chunked uploading without being compressed and choose 512KB for the chunk size it'll be more like ~100 chunks as the minimum.

But user's might also want to store the code for multiple canisters in a single canister's Wasm store, so I think the limit should be closer to 1GB.

Author: We'll start with some conservative choice, use 50MB for chunked storage and the slowly increase it.

### IC method `upload_chunk` {#ic-upload_chunk}

> Canisters have associated some storage space (hence forth chunk storage) where they can hold chunks of Wasm modules that are too lage to fit in a single message. This method allows the controllers of a canister to upload such chunks. The method returns the hash of the chunk that was stored. The size of each chunk should be up to 1MB. The size of the chunk store is bounded: currently it can hold up to 40chunks. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Canisters have associated some storage space (hence forth chunk storage) where they can hold chunks of Wasm modules that are too lage to fit in a single message. This method allows the controllers of a canister to upload such chunks. The method returns the hash of the chunk that was stored. The size of each chunk should be up to 1MB. The size of the chunk store is bounded: currently it can hold up to 40 chunks. 
```

The optional `sender_canister_version` parameter can contain the caller's canister version. If provided, its value must be equal to `ic0.canister_version`.

### IC method `upload_chunk` {#ic-upload_chunk}

> Canisters have associated some storage space (hence forth chunk storage) where they can hold chunks of Wasm modules that are too lage to fit in a single message. This method allows the controllers of a canister to upload such chunks. The method returns the hash of the chunk that was stored. The size of each chunk should be up to 1MB. The size of the chunk store is bounded: currently it can hold up to `CHUNK_STORE_SIZE` chunks. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Canisters have associated some storage space (hence forth chunk storage) where they can hold chunks of Wasm modules that are too lage to fit in a single message. This method allows the controllers of a canister to upload such chunks. The method returns the hash of the chunk that was stored. The size of each chunk should be up to 1MiB. The size of the chunk store is bounded: currently it can hold up to `CHUNK_STORE_SIZE` chunks. 
```
I suppose the limit is half of a maximum message size which is 1MiB.

> Canisters have associated some storage space (hence forth chunk storage) where they can hold chunks of Wasm modules that are too lage to fit in a single message. This method allows the controllers of a canister to upload such chunks. The method returns the hash of the chunk that was stored. The size of each chunk should be up to 1MB. The size of the chunk store is bounded: currently it can hold up to `CHUNK_STORE_SIZE` chunks. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Canisters have associated some storage space (hence forth chunk storage) where they can hold chunks of Wasm modules that are too lage to fit in a single message. This method allows the controllers of a canister to upload such chunks. The method returns the hash of the chunk that was stored. The size of each chunk must be at most 1MB. The maximum number of chunks in the chunk store is `CHUNK_STORE_SIZE` chunks. 
```

Reviewer: Implemented as a manual commit.

> Canisters have associated some storage space (hence forth chunk storage) where they can hold chunks of Wasm modules that are too lage to fit in a single message. This method allows the controllers of a canister to upload such chunks. The method returns the hash of the chunk that was stored. The size of each chunk should be up to 1MB. The size of the chunk store is bounded: currently it can hold up to `CHUNK_STORE_SIZE` chunks. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Canisters have associated some storage space (hence forth chunk storage) where they can hold chunks of Wasm modules that are too lage to fit in a single message. This method allows the controllers of a canister (and the canister itself) to upload such chunks. The method returns the hash of the chunk that was stored. The size of each chunk should be up to 1MB. The size of the chunk store is bounded: currently it can hold up to `CHUNK_STORE_SIZE` chunks. 
```

Reviewer: also applied to the other methods below

Author: done

### IC method `delete_chunks` {#ic-delete_chunks}

> Canister controllers can delete chunks stored in the canister's chunk storage. The caller provides as input a list of hashes; the effect of the call is that the IC deletes from the canister's chunk storage the chunks that correspond to hashes in the provided list.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Canister controllers can delete chunks stored in the canister's chunk storage. The caller provides as input a list of hashes; the effect of the call is that the IC deletes from the canister's chunk storage the chunks whose hashes are contained in the provided list.   
```

-   If the `wasm_module` starts with byte sequence `[0x1f, 0x8b, 0x08]`, the system parses `wasm_module` as a gzip-compressed WebAssembly binary.

> -   If the `wasm_module` starts with the byte sequence `0xd9 0xd9 0xf7 `, the system parses `wasm_module` as a self describing CBOR encoding of a map that specifies: an optional canister identifier `storage_canister` and a list of hash values, `[h0,h1,...,hk]`. In this case, the system looks up in the chunk store of `storage_canister` (or that of the target canister if this parameter is not provided) blobs corresponding to `h1,...,hk`, concatenates them to obtain a blob of bytes and checks that `h0` is the hash of the resulting blob. The caller must be the controller of the `storage_canister`.  If the lookup succeeds, then the system interprets the blob as a vanilla wasm module (or a gzipped one) per the rules above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   If the `wasm_module` starts with the byte sequence `[0xd9, 0xd9, 0xf7]`, the system parses `wasm_module` as a self describing CBOR encoding of a map that specifies: an optional canister identifier `storage_canister` and a list of hash values, `[h0,h1,...,hk]`. In this case, the system looks up in the chunk store of `storage_canister` (or that of the target canister if this parameter is not provided) blobs corresponding to `h1,...,hk`, concatenates them to obtain a blob of bytes and checks that `h0` is the hash of the resulting blob. The caller must be the controller of the `storage_canister`.  If the lookup succeeds, then the system interprets the blob as a vanilla wasm module (or a gzipped one) per the rules above.
```

> -   If the `wasm_module` starts with the byte sequence `0xd9 0xd9 0xf7 `, the system parses `wasm_module` as a self describing CBOR encoding of a map that specifies: an optional canister identifier `storage_canister` and a list of hash values, `[h0,h1,...,hk]`. In this case, the system looks up in the chunk store of `storage_canister` (or that of the target canister if this parameter is not provided) blobs corresponding to `h1,...,hk`, concatenates them to obtain a blob of bytes and checks that `h0` is the hash of the resulting blob. The caller must be the controller of the `storage_canister`.  If the lookup succeeds, then the system interprets the blob as a vanilla wasm module (or a gzipped one) per the rules above.

Reviewer: I suppose the storage canister must be on the same subnet.

Author: Good point; i'll add that as an explanation

-   If the `wasm_module` starts with byte sequence `[0x1f, 0x8b, 0x08]`, the system parses `wasm_module` as a gzip-compressed WebAssembly binary.

> -   If the `wasm_module` starts with the byte sequence `[0xd9, 0xd9, 0xf7]`, the system parses `wasm_module` as a self describing CBOR encoding of a map that specifies: an optional canister identifier `storage_canister` and a list of hash values, `[h0,h1,...,hk]` with `k <= MAX_CHUNKS_IN_LARGE_WASM`. In this case, the system looks up in the chunk store of `storage_canister` (or that of the target canister if this parameter is not provided) blobs corresponding to `h1,...,hk`, concatenates them to obtain a blob of bytes and checks that `h0` is the hash of the resulting blob. The caller must be a controller of the `storage_canister`.  If the lookup succeeds, then the system interprets the blob as a vanilla wasm module (or a gzipped one) per the rules above.

Reviewer: In the CDDL, the canister is referred to as "location".

> -   If the `wasm_module` starts with the byte sequence `[0xd9, 0xd9, 0xf7]`, the system parses `wasm_module` as a self describing CBOR encoding of a map that specifies: an optional canister identifier `storage_canister` and a list of hash values, `[h0,h1,...,hk]` with `k <= MAX_CHUNKS_IN_LARGE_WASM`. In this case, the system looks up in the chunk store of `storage_canister` (or that of the target canister if this parameter is not provided) blobs corresponding to `h1,...,hk`, concatenates them to obtain a blob of bytes and checks that `h0` is the hash of the resulting blob. The caller must be a controller of the `storage_canister`.  If the lookup succeeds, then the system interprets the blob as a vanilla wasm module (or a gzipped one) per the rules above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   If the `wasm_module` starts with the byte sequence `[0xd9, 0xd9, 0xf7]`, the system parses `wasm_module` as a self describing CBOR encoding of a map that specifies: an optional canister identifier `storage_canister` and a list of hash values, `[h0,h1,...,hk]` with `k <= MAX_CHUNKS_IN_LARGE_WASM`. In this case, the system looks up in the chunk store of `storage_canister` (or that of the target canister if this parameter is not provided) blobs corresponding to `h1,...,hk`, concatenates them to obtain a blob of bytes and checks that `h0` is the hash of the resulting blob. The caller must be a controller of the `storage_canister` or the caller must be the `storage_canister`.  If the lookup succeeds, then the system interprets the blob as a vanilla wasm module (or a gzipped one) per the rules above.
```
I think this also makes sense.

This method traps if the canister's cycle balance decreases below the canister's freezing limit after executing the method.

### IC method `install_chunked_code` {#ic-install_chunked_code}

This method installs code that had previously been uploaded in chunks.

The `mode`, `arg`, and `sender_canister_version` parameters are as for `install_code`.
The `target_canister` specifies the canister where the code should be installed.
The optional `storage_canister` specifies the canister in whose chunk storage the chunks are stored (this parameter defaults to `target_canister` if not specified).

> For the call to succeed, the caller must be a controller of the `storage_canister` or the caller must be the `storage_canister` and

Reviewer: The issue with ... or ... and ... is that it's not clear whether we mean
- (... or ...) and ...
- ... or (... and ...)

Ingress message inspection is applied, and messages that are not accepted by the canister are dropped.

> The (unspecified) function `idle_cycles_burned_rate(compute_allocation, memory_allocation, memory_usage, subnet_size)` determines the idle resource consumption rate in cycles per day of a canister given its current compute and memory allocation, memory usage, and subnet size. The function `freezing_limit(compute_allocation, memory_allocation, freezing_threshold, memory_usage, subnet_size)` determines the freezing limit in cycles of a canister given its current compute and memory allocation, freezing threshold in seconds, memory usage, chunk store usage & and subnet size. The value `freezing_limit(compute_allocation, memory_allocation, freezing_threshold, memory_usage, subnet_size)` is derived from `idle_cycles_burned_rate(compute_allocation, memory_allocation, memory_usage, subnet_size)` and `freezing_threshold` as follows:

Reviewer: Doesn't the "chunk store usage" count towards the canister's memory usage?

Author: Good point --

```

#### IC Management Canister: Upload Chunk

> The controller of a canister, or the canister itself can upload chunks to the chunk store of that canister.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A controller of a canister, or the canister itself can upload chunks to the chunk store of that canister.
```
Since there might be multiple controllers.

```

#### IC Management Canister: Upload Chunk

A controller of a canister, or the canister itself can upload chunks to the chunk store of that canister.

Conditions

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.method_name = 'upload_chunk'
M.arg = candid(A)

> |dom(S.chunk_store[A.canister_id]) ∪ {SHA-256(A.chunk}| <= CHUNK_STORE_SI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|dom(S.chunk_store[A.canister_id]) ∪ {SHA-256(A.chunk)}| <= CHUNK_STORE_SIZE
```

```

#### IC Management Canister: Upload Chunk

A controller of a canister, or the canister itself can upload chunks to the chunk store of that canister.

Conditions

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.method_name = 'upload_chunk'
M.arg = candid(A)

> chunk_store_size = |{x | chunk_store[A.canister_id][x] not null}|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
chunk_store_size = |{x | S.chunk_store[A.canister_id][x] not null}|
```

> chunk_store_size < CHUNK_STORE_SIZE and (M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id] ∪ {A.canister_id})

Author: done

hash = SHA-256(A.chunk)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id] ∪ {A.canister_id}

```

State after

```html

S with

>     chunk_store[A.canister_id](hash') = chunk_store[A.canister_id] if hash'≠ hash

Reviewer: I'd drop this line due to the implicit assumption that everything stays the same that we don't explicitly override in the "with" clause.

Author: Good point

>     chunk_store[A.canister_id](hash) = A.chunk

Reviewer: Do we also require that no chunk with that hash is already in the store? If not, then we should adjust the condition on the maximum number of chunks in the store (we don't need a strict inequality in this case).

Reviewer: Thank you!

    messages = Older_messages · Younger_messages ·
      ResponseMessage {
        origin = M.origin
        response = candid(hash)
      }

```

#### IC Management Canister: Clear chunk store

The controller of a canister, or the canister itself can clear the chunk store of that canister. 

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.method_name = 'clear_store'
M.arg = candid(A)
M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id] ∪ {A.canister_id}
```

State after

```html

S with
    chunk_store[A.canister_id] = ()
    messages = Older_messages · Younger_messages ·
      ResponseMessage {
        origin = M.origin
        response = candid()
      }

```

#### IC Management Canister: Delete chunks

The controller of a canister, or the canister itself can delete chunks from the canister chunk store. 

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.method_name = 'delete_chunks'
M.arg = candid(A)
chunk_store'[hash] = chunk_store[A.canister_id][hash] if hash ∉ A.hash_list

> chunk_store'[hash] = null if hash ∈ A.hash_list

Reviewer: I'd drop these lines and undefine `hash` in the "State after" section analogously to the canister deletion transition (for instance).

M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id] ∪ {A.canister_id}

```

State after

```html

S with

>     chunk_store[A.canister_id] = chunk_store'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    chunk_store[A.canister_id](hash) = (deleted)
```

    messages = Older_messages · Younger_messages ·
      ResponseMessage {
        origin = M.origin
        response = candid()
      }

```

#### IC Management Canister: List stored chunks

The controller of a canister, or the canister itself can list the hashes of the chunks stored in the chunk store.

```html

S.messages = Older_messages · CallMessage M · Younger_messages
(M.queue = Unordered) or (∀ msg ∈ Older_messages. msg.queue ≠ M.queue)
M.method_name = 'stored_chunks'
M.arg = candid(A)

> stored_chunks = {hash | chunk_store[A.canister_id][hash] ≠ null}

Reviewer: I'd inline this expression as
```
dom(S.chunk_store[A.canister_id])
```
in the "State after" part below.

Author: done

M.caller ∈ S.controllers[A.canister_id] ∪ {A.canister_id}

```

State after

```html

S with

>     chunk_store[A.canister_id] = chunk_store'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
